Introduction to GCC 3.4 for RISC OS
===================================

This is a short introduction to GCC, the GNU Compiler Collection or RISC OS.
This document does not provide an introduction to programming, for that you
will have to get a text book on the language you are interested in.

IMPORTANT NOTE 1: The GCC compiler binaries are at least 3000K, so you must
ensure that a large enough Wimpslot has been allocated. Please refer to the
`Troubleshooting' section later in this document, if you are getting
`Address exception' and `No writeable memory at this address' errors.

IMPORTANT NOTE 2: If ypu have received this copy of GCC from a CD, then it is
likely there is a more up-to-date version obtainable from elsewhere.

IMPORTANT NOTE 3: GCC requires a minimum of 16MB RAM.

The RISC OS GNU Compiler Collection consists of a generic front end program
`gcc' that provides a consistent interface to the compilers themselves.
Currently compilers are supported for the languages C, C++ and Fortran.

GCC is covered by the FSF General Public License (see the files docs.COPYING
and docs.COPYINGLIB for details).

This port of GCC is Copyright (c) 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001 Nick Burrett
Copyright (c) 2002, 2003, 2004 GCCSDK Development Team

As with all GNU programs, THERE IS NO WARRANTY OF ANY SORT

The standard RISC OS distribution contains GCC and supporting binaries
allowing you to start developing applications straight away. So you get
a C compiler, a C++ compiler, an AOF linker, an AOF assembler, the UnixLib
C runtime library and headers and stubs for the SharedCLibrary (as found in
the RISC OS ROMS). 


Installation
------------

To install GCC, copy the contents of this archive onto your hard disc.
Other compilers can be installed by copying the contents of their
archives into the same directory as where you install GCC - RISC OS will
automatically combine the !gcc directories together. Running !gcc will
setup Run$Path to automatically search for the compiler tools.

As compilers are installed, sub-directories named according to the language
they support will be placed within !gcc.docs. These sub-directories will
contain specific information for the language compiler, including its
usage and environment requirements.

GCC uses a linker front end, LD. This will search for both drlink and link
on the current Run$Path and in that order.

This completes installation, and GCC may be used simply by typing
'gcc' at the CLI prompt.


Simple compilations
-------------------

This assumes you have actually installed a compiler and are using UnixLib
as the run-time library. Please note that the instructions below are generic
and the ideas presented can be applied to all GNU compilers. The usage of
C source files is merely for example purposes.

Source files are stored in the standard ASCII text format and kept in a
directory that is relevant for the language of your program. For example,
C programs are stored in directory 'c' and C++ programs are stored in 'cc'.

For simple use, all that is needed is to set up a command line prompt and
ensure there is enough free memory to run the compiler (details of memory
requirements vary between compilers and can be found in the specific
compiler documentation).

To compile a C program just type:

   *gcc hellow.c

This will compile, assemble and link the source 'c.hellow' to produce an
executable called '!RunImage', which can be run immediately.

Adding the switch '-o' to the command line, it's possible to specify a
place to store the resultant file:

   *gcc hellow.c -o hellow

This will comple, assemble and link the source 'hellow.c' to produce an
executable called 'hellow', which can be run immediately.

It is possible to compile several sources at one go, mixing C sources in
the same program, using a command line of:

   *gcc file1.c file2.c file3.c file4.c

Again, this will compile, assemble and link all the sources to produce the
'!RunImage' executable.

To compile to the object form, use the -c switch. i.e.

   gcc -c file.c

will compile and assemble 'file.c' to 'file.o'.

To compile the same files but using the SharedCLibrary as the target
run-time library instead of UnixLib, add the switch '-mlibscl' to the
command line. For example:

  gcc hellow.c -mlibscl

will compile and link the hellow.c source file, using header files
from the SharedCLibrary, and linking against the library C:o.stubs.
The output file will still be called '!RunImage' and can be run
in the same way.

Support has been provided for both RISC OS and UNIX format filenames. GCC
will translate any UNIX filenames into their RISC OS equivalent. For example:

  ../include/stdio.h	is translated to	^.include.h.stdio
  /work/gcc/hello.c	is translated to	$.work.gcc.c.hello
  stdlib.h		is translated to	h.stdlib

but
  tree.def		is translated to	tree/def

For further examples of compilation procedures, please look at `Examples'
in !gcc.files.

The full GCC manual can be referred to at !gcc.docs.gcc.

Switches
--------

This is a list of the simpler, standard switches for GCC. Full details can
be obtained from the !gcc.docs.gcc manual. Please see below for the ARM
specific switches since these have altered from the original gcc version.

The switches described below are useable with any GNU compiler.

-c              compile and assemble the source to the object file
-S              compile the source to assembler code
-E              preprocess the source file
-o <file>       put the resulting output into <file>
-O              apply some optimisations to the output
-O2             apply full optimisation.
-O3             full optimisation and inline small functions as well.

There are some additional ARM specific switches.

 -mapcs, -mapcs-frame
   target for ARM Procedure Call Standard stack frames.

 -mpoke-function-name
   place the name of the current function before the start of the function
   to allow the post mortem debugger to print a readable backtrace.
   This option is disabled by default.
   Turing this option on can increase code size by about 3.5% for C programs
   and as much as 10% for C++. However, it should be noted that the
   performance of the generated application will not be slower. It is useful
   to turn this option on when developing applications as it can lead to a
   clear indication of where a program is failing.

 -mapcs-stack-check
   provide explicit stack checking on entry to each function which allocates
   temporary variables on the stack.  This option is enabled by default.
   Disabling this option will reduce the function prologue overhead by
   3-5 instructions.

 -mfpe=2
   Target the Floating Point architecture version 2.  Notably the function
   prologues and epilogues use the STFE instruction to preserve floating-point
   registers rathern than the much faster and more accurate SFM instruction
   of the version 3 (default) architecture.

RISC OS specific options

 -mthrowback
   send errors to a text editor capable of receiving 'throwbacks'.
   Error throwbacks will only occur when the DDEUtils module has previously
   been loaded.

 -mlibscl
   build and link source code against the SharedCLibrary headers and
   library files.

 -munixlib
   build and link source code against the UnixLib headers and library
   files. 

   -mlibscl and -munixlib are mutually exclusive.  -munixlib is the
   default.

 -mamu
   Generate the file !Depend which contains a list of all the source
   files that the produced object depends on. This is intended for use
   with Acorn's Make Utility (AMU), which edits the makefile to include
   these after the '# Dynamic Dependencies' line.


LD
--

LD is a front end program that converts the linker command line as generated
by gcc to a format recognised by Drlink and Link. LD also attempts to
convert Unix format names to RISC OS format. The option recognised are:

 -L<dir>
   This specifies a directory/path that LD is to use when searching
   for libraries. <dir> must be either a path (i.e gcc:, etc), or it
   must be a valid Unix/RISC OS directory name, ending in either '/'
   or '.'. Directories are searched in the order that they are
   specified.

 -l<file>
   This specifies the name of a library file which LD will search the
   library directories for. This may either be a complete filename (i.e
   C:o.stubs) or just the leaf name, in which case, LD will search
   though the specified library directories for the file o.lib<file>
   and o.<file> if the former isn't found.

 -o <file>
   This specifies the filename to which the resultant executable will
   be stored.

 -via <file>
   <file> contains a list of object files to be included in the link process.

 -version
   Print the version number of 'ld'.

 -help
   Display a brief summary of LD and its command line arguments.


The following Drlink linker commands are recognised:
  -acornmap, -area[map] <file>, -aif, -aof, -bin, -case,
  -leave[weak], -map, -no[unused], -output, -res[can],
  -throwback, -via <file>, -verbose

The following Acorn Link linker commands are recognised:
  -aif, -aof, -bin, -map, -via <file>, -nounused[areas], -verbose

Unrecognised commands are flagged as an error and LD will not perform the
link process. Characters with square brackets are optional.

The sequence '-Lgcc: -LC: -lgcc -lstubs' will cause LD to look for the files
gcc:o.libgcc, gcc:o.gcc, c:o.libgcc, c:o.gcc, gcc:o.libstubs, gcc:o.stubs,
c:o.libstubs and c:o.stubs, taking the first gcc and stubs files that it finds.

Linker options can be passed from GCC to link using -Wl and -XLinker options.

The linker must be in the default Run$Path, as LD does not handle the -B
command. Please note that it is best to define GCC$Linker in the !gcc.!run
file to point to the linker you want to use. e.g.
  Set GCC$Linker "link"
will make LD use the program 'link' for linking.


Predefines
----------

The following preprocessor constants are defined by GCC:
   '__arm', '__arm__', '__riscos', '__riscos__', '__aof__'
   '__GNUC__', '__GNUC_MAJOR__', '__JMP_BUF_SIZE'

To implement dynamic allocations within a function, it is necessary to add
an extra field to jmpbuf. Fortunately the setjmp.h header files recognise
__JMP_BUF_SIZE and can alter their jmpbuf array appropriately.

When targetting the SharedCLibrary (i.e. -mlibscl switch is supplied on
gcc command line) then an additional preprocessor constant is defined,
namely `__TARGET_SCL__'.


GCC and Virtual Memory
----------------------

GNU compilers use a lot of memory and nothing can be done about that. For
the Risc PC, UnixLib has been modified to make use of dynamic areas. So
users with small memory machines can use Clares' Virtualise to provide a
working virtual memory envionment for them. See the section *Dynamic Areas*
below.

Users of older machines, the Archimedes and A5000, with less than 8MB RAM
will not be able to use this software.

Dynamic areas
-------------

The following information is deprecated, as UnixLib programs have been able
to extend their own Wimpslot for some years, but it is included for reference.

UnixLib has a facility to use Dynamic Areas, found in RISC OS 3.5
and above, for the program's heap. The heap is another name for the
malloc area. The advantages of using a dynamic area for the program's
heap include :

   * the Wimpslot of the program can be limited to the code and stack
     requirements of the program. This helps alleviate the cost of RISC
     OS task switching which slows down dramatically as the Wimpslot
     grows in size.

   * Dynamic Areas provide a means of Virtual Memory when used with a
     product such as Virtualise[1]. Virtual Memory allows programs to
     use more data space than is available with just physical memory.

Basically, use

  *Set GCC$Heap ""

to enable dynamic areas for the compiler and

  *UnSet GCC$Heap

to disable dynamic areas for the compiler.

Before running a program set the wimpslot in the normal way, but it only
needs to be large enough to hold the sum of the largest executables that
can be run concurrently. e.g., with gcc, use the unsqueezed size of gcc
plus cc1. When running from a command line amu remember to allow
additional space for the amu executable and amu's workspace (though this
is tricky to estimate!).

If other programs that form part of a compiler are run directly from the
command line, e.g., gnatmake, then separate environment variables must
be set to allow these programs to use dynamic areas for the program's
heap. So, with gnatmake,

   *Set gnatmake$heap ""

As a user, you should not really need to worry about these details as the
!gcc.!run file already contains the relevant lines. Please read the !run
file if you are a Risc PC user, since some lines will need to be uncommented.

[1] Virtualise is a commercial product available from Clares. Peter Burwood
has no connection with Clares or the Virtualise product other than being a
user of Virtualise. If other similar products become available then UnixLib
should work transparently since the UnixLib startup code does not use
any Virtualise features.


Troubleshooting
---------------

Here are described some common problems users have with gcc and the GNU
compilers. Possible solutions are provided for the known problems.

1. The compiler fails to compile anything but no error message is reported.

  This is usually caused by a lack of memory. To see how far through
  compilation a file has gone, try compiling with the '-v' flag. '-v' gives
  verbose output and will show the programs gcc is executing.
  
  A lack of memory will be shown up by an almost instantaneous return from
  any program executed. If this happens, try increasing the wimpslot,
  using *wimpslot -min nnnK, where nnn is as follows:

      4000K or more for GNU C, Objective-C, C++, Fortran and Pascal.
      6000K or more for GNAT Ada.
  
  When the compiler runs out of memory during compilation, an error
  'virtual memory exhausted' is usually reported.

2. Abort on data transfer errors are displayed during compilation

  Insufficient memory has been allocated to the program. Increase
  the wimpslot.

3. The error 'No writable memory at this address' is returned.

  This is caused by insufficient memory memory and can be fixed by
  increasing the wimpslot to similar values as above.

4. ld fatal error: drlink returned exit status 12

  This is caused by insufficient memory during the linking stage.
  Increase the wimpslot to fix this.

5. A source file is correctly compiled and linked. The resultant executable
   'hellow' is placed in the current directory. However, when I try and
   run the file I get the error 'No such file or directory'.
   
   This and many other obsure errors are caused by linking source files
   against run-time libraries that are incompatible with the StrongARM
   processor. An example would be UnixLib 3.7a.
   
   StrongARM compatibility wasn't introduced to UnixLib until version 3.7b.


AOF files, Libraries, Linkers etc.
----------------------------------

The following is a brief introduction to the world of compiling source
code, object files and linking.

Taking the C compiler as an example. Language C source files are stored
within a directory called 'c'.

Typing
  *gcc -c hello.c -o hello.o

will tell gcc to run the C compiler on the source file c.hello. The resultant
output will be stored in the directory 'o' as hello. Files in 'o' are called
Acorn Object Format (AOF) files.

During multistage compilation (i.e. where a program is made up from several
source files), the compiler will compile one file at a time and this will
produce several AOF files.

Each source file might contain references to variables and functions that are
not defined within its own scope. For an executable to be created, these
references must be resolved and that is the purpose of the Linker.

The Linker takes AOF files and attempts to resolve references between them.
Not all references are defined within AOF files, some (like printf) are
defined within libraries - called Acorn Library Format (ALF) files. So the
Linker will also look at ALF files to match unresolved symbols.

For example, below is a list of C source files that will be compiled to make
the program called Harry. Along with each source file is a list of the
symbols that are defined within that source, and a list of symbols that
are not defined (i.e. referenced) by that source.

    C source: fred.c
      Symbols defined: foo, bar, pint
      Symbols referenced: printf, puts, food
    
    C source: bob.c
      Symbols defined: fags, beer, food
      Symbols referenced: bar, pint
    
    C source: harry.c
      Symbols defined: main
      Symbols referenced: foo

Using gcc to compile fred.c, bob.c, harry.c will produce three AOF files,
fred.o, bob.o and harry.o.

harry.c contains a reference to 'foo' which is defined within c.fred. So
the Linker must combine harry.o and fred.c to resolve a reference.

fred.c contains a reference to 'printf', 'puts' and 'food'. 'food' is
defined by bob.c so bob.o will also be combined with harry.o and fred.o
to resolve further references.

'printf' and 'puts' are defined by the C library, therefore the linker will
need to combine the ALF file with harry.o, fred.o and bob.o to finally
generate an executable.


Obtaining compilers
-------------------

As said earlier, GCC is a compiler front end. The compilers themselves
can be found at http://gccsdk.riscos.info/


Distribution patches
--------------------

From time to time bugs might be fixed in the GCC distribution. To save
download time involved in uploading/fetching new binaries, patch archives
will become available from the address:

  http://gccsdk.riscos.info/

Announcements will be posted to comp.sys.acorn.announce whenever new
patch archives are uploaded.


Contacting the author
----------------------

A mailing list has been setup for discussions on GCC, including development
work.  To join it, send mail to majordomo@gccsdk.riscos.info and put
`subscribe gcc' as the only item of text in the message body.


Location of the main GCC sources
--------------------------------

The official GCC website is http://gcc.gnu.org
The official GNU website is http://www.gnu.org
