Gnu Tar 1.30 for RISC OS
The built in capability of piping to and from the compression utilities will not work in RISC OS.
Potentially it could be done externally with redirection, or just perform the tasks separately.

General use
Creating
It is usual to have the folder(s)/file(s) to be compressed located in the CSD so as to avoid
leading slash complications
This also allows the tarfile to be expanded into different places later.
It's possible this could be managed by using options though. (untested by author) 
Using tar vcf foo.tar would also set the RISC OS filetype, but if there is a path involved,
it would need unixifying also. eg RAMFS::RamDisc0.$/foo.tar 

Multivolumes
RISC OS does not get required tar environment variables (probably because of the child process)
the way linux does, but a feature has been added so auto naming of volume numbers can be done.
A tar path of RAMFS::RamDisc0.$.foo  will output foo for the initial file and foo-02 foo-03
foo-04 ...  thereafter.
The un-numbered initial file is also used to kick off the multivolume extraction process.
 eg tar vxf RAMFS::RamDisc0.$.foo   

The volume size (-L64M etc) is not needed or used when extracting.
The multivolume option will pause at the end of each volume requiring <return> or 'y' to
continue, however if this pause is not required, use the option -Fnostop 
This is non-standard useage, but using an info-script-file or command would negate the added 
autorenaming feature anyway. Using -F implies multivolume -M.
The pause can also be used in the standard tar way for naming or running an interactive shell
or command by entering '!'
The default is to run dash interactively. !Dash must be seen by filer first.  
Alternatively, previously use *set SHELL bash  (or other, BASIC, Python, Lua etc) or a command.
The -F option can run a command or shell also, volume autorenaming will be cancelled, and
an alternative volume naming/handling method could be used.

This tar is compiled to use ,xyz filetype preservation, but will extract generic untyped tars.

