MPlayer - The Movie Player

This RISC OS version was created by the GCCSDK Autobuilder

See the "doc" subdirectory for more documentation or the official mplayer
website at http://www.mplayerhq.hu

Getting Started
---------------
The !MPlayer folder needs to be seen by the filer for the filetype associations to be
set. These being 'AVI', 'MPEG' and 'VOB'. Alternatively just double-click the !MPlayer
folder.
The filetype of the file you want to play in !MPlayer needs to be set to one of the above.
As long a !MPlayer recognises the file it doesn't matter what the filetype is set to as
long as it is one of 'AVI', 'MPEG' or 'VOB'.
If nothing happens when you double-click a file try looking at the 'stdout' and 'stderr'
files in the !MPlayer folder. These may give a clue to the problem.
From version 1.01 it is now possible to play audio streams. See the example 'mplayacc' Obey
file in the !Mplayer folder.

History
-------
RISC OS Version 1.00 (29-Feb-12)
- this is the initial version of mplayer/mencoder built for RISC OS.
RISC OS Version 1.01 (13-Sep-12)
- built with latest source
  added support for Opus Interactive Audio Codec
  added oss audio device support, uses much less CPU time playing audio streams

Issues
------
Its slow. But what did you expect. What it will do is make a passable attempt at
playing any file you throw at it without collapsing in a heap.

If you find a file that doesn't play feel free to contact me on the email address
below. It may be the required library is not linked into the executable.

There seems to be a problem with sound and having alignment exceptions turned on on ARMv7.
If nothing happens when you double-click on a file try turning alignment exceptions off.

Faster Version
------------
If you have omap3/4 based hardware. This currently includes Beagleboard and Pandaboard based
machines. There is a further optimised version. Contact me on the below email address if you
would like to try it.
For best results run on a Pandaboard ES at 1500MHz.

Contact
-------
Chris Gransden - chrisg@care4free.net
